Title: 15545_HyRF_Hybrid_Radiance_Fie.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=3molquhFpv

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# HyRF: Hybrid Radiance Fields for Memory-efficient and High-quality Novel View Synthesis 

Zipeng Wang 

zwang253@cse.ust.hk 

Dan Xu 

danxu@cse.ust.hk 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 

Abstract 

Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as a powerful alternative to NeRF-based approaches, enabling real-time, high-quality novel view synthesis through explicit, optimizable 3D Gaussians. However, 3DGS suffers from signif-icant memory overhead due to its reliance on per-Gaussian parameters to model view-dependent effects and anisotropic shapes. While recent works propose com-pressing 3DGS with neural fields, these methods struggle to capture high-frequency spatial variations in Gaussian properties, leading to degraded reconstruction of fine details. We present Hybrid Radiance Fields (HyRF), a novel scene representation that combines the strengths of explicit Gaussians and neural fields. HyRF decom-poses the scene into (1) a compact set of explicit Gaussians storing only critical high-frequency parameters and (2) grid-based neural fields that predict remaining properties. To enhance representational capacity, we introduce a decoupled neu-ral field architecture, separately modeling geometry (scale, opacity, rotation) and view-dependent color. Additionally, we propose a hybrid rendering scheme that composites Gaussian splatting with a neural field-predicted background, addressing limitations in distant scene representation. Experiments demonstrate that HyRF achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality while reducing model size by over 20× compared to 3DGS and maintaining real-time performance. Our project page is available at https://wzpscott.github.io/hyrf/ .

1 Introduction 

Novel view synthesis is a critical area in computer vision, with applications in scene manipulation [ 32 ,45 , 47 , 33 ], autonomous driving [ 34 , 43 ], virtual fly-throughs [ 44 , 25 , 24 ], and 3D generation models [ 19 , 14 , 12 , 36 ]. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [ 26 ] have emerged as a leading technology, leveraging implicit scene representations through neural networks and volume rendering to generate novel views. While NeRF-based methods excel in producing high-quality renderings with compact model sizes, they are hindered by slow rendering speeds. In recent advancements, the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [ 15 ] method has emerged as a compelling alternative to NeRF-based approaches, enabling real-time rendering of high-resolution novel views. Unlike NeRF, which relies on continuous neural networks, 3DGS employs a set of explicit, optimizable 3D Gaussians to represent scenes. This approach is able to bypass the computational overhead of volume rendering by leveraging an efficient differentiable point-based splatting process [ 57 , 52 ], achieving real-time performance while enhancing rendering quality. However, 3DGS suffers from significant memory overhead due to its parameter-intensive representa-tion of view-dependent colors and anisotropic shapes. Each 3D Gaussian requires 59 parameters, with 48 parameters dedicated to view-dependent color representation via spherical harmonics and 7 parameters encoding anisotropic scale and rotation. This stands in stark contrast to NeRF-based 

39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). MipNeRF -360          

> Missing details, low speed
> 3DGS
> Large size, blurry background
> Neural Field + 3DGS
> Missing details, blurry background
> 0.06 FPS | 8.6 MB 125 FPS | 240 MB 117 FPS | 32 MB
> Neural Gaussians Explicit Gaussians Background Map

Full Rendering 

> 118 FPS | 37 MB

Previous methods 

Ours methods (HyRF) 

> Ground Truth

Figure 1: Mip-NeRF360 [ 3 ] struggles with inaccuracies in fine details and slow rendering speeds, while 3DGS [15] face challenges of large model sizes and blurry background. A naive combination of neural fields and 3DGS leads to loss of high-frequency information. Our method overcomes these challenges through an innovative hybrid architecture. By synergistically combining neural fields, explicit Gaussians, and neural background map, we achieve competitive or superior performance in both visual quality and model compactness, while maintaining real-time rendering capabilities. methods, which efficiently model view-dependent effects through neural network conditioning with minimal parameter growth. A natural approach to reducing 3DGS storage costs is to encode 3D Gaussian properties in grid-based neural fields [ 49 , 42 ]. However, this method faces a fundamental limitation: the fixed resolution of grid-based representations struggles to capture the high-frequency spatial variations in 3D Gaussian properties. This issue is particularly pronounced when modeling scenes with rapid opacity and scale changes at object boundaries or high-frequency view-dependent effects. As a result, naively fitting 3D Gaussians to neural fields often fails to reconstruct fine details, such as thin geometric structures and high-frequency color variations. In this paper, we present Hybrid Radiance Fields (HyRF), a novel scene representation that effec-tively addresses the frequency limitations of neural Gaussian approaches while maintaining low memory overhead. Our key insight is to decompose the representation into two complementary components: grid-based neural fields that capture low-frequency variations, and a sparse set of explicit compact Gaussians that preserve high-frequency details. Our neural component employs a decoupled architecture with two specialized neural fields: a geometry network dedicated to modeling geometric Gaussian properties (scale, opacity, and rotation), and a separate appearance network for view-dependent color prediction. This explicit disentanglement of geometric and photometric learning objectives significantly enhances representational capacity of neural fields while maintaining parameter efficiency. Meanwhile, our explicit Gaussian component stores only essential properties, i.e., 3D positions, isotropic scales, opacity values, and diffuse colors, in order to minimize memory overhead while preserving critical scene details. To achieve both efficiency and rendering quality, we propose a hybrid rendering pipeline that operates in three stages. First, our visibility pre-culling module eliminates Gaussians outside the current view frustum, significantly reducing computational overhead of querying neural fields. Next, we process the remaining visible Gaussians by querying their positions through our neural field to predict neural Gaussian properties, which are then combined with the stored explicit parameters to recover high-frequency details. To address the insufficient background modeling of Gaussian representations, we implement a learnable solution where the neural field generates a background map projected onto a background sphere. This background map is composited with the foreground Gaussian rendering through alpha blending, therefore achieves high visual quality for both foreground and remote background objects. In summary, our key contributions include: (i) A novel integration of neural fields with explicit compact Gaussians, preserving high-frequency details while minimizing memory overhead. (ii) A 2dual-field architecture that improves the modeling of Gaussian properties by disentangling geometry and view-dependent effects. (iii) A hybrid rendering strategy that reduces computational overhead and improves rendering quality for backgrounds. (iv) Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior rendering quality, reduces model size by 20× compared to 3DGS [ 15 ], and maintains real-time performance. 

2 Related Work 

Neural Radiance Fields. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [ 26 ] revolutionized novel view synthesis by modeling scenes as volumetric radiance fields, where each point in space is associated with radiance and density values through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The state-of-the-art MLP-based method, Mip-NeRF360 [ 3 ], has achieved significant improvements in anti-aliasing and handling unbounded scenes. However, MLP-based radiance fields suffer from slow training and rendering speeds due to the extensive querying required for volume rendering. To address these inefficiencies, recent approaches have integrated NeRF with structured arrays of learnable features [ 21 , 53 , 37 , 9, 41 ]. For instance, TensoRF [ 4] employs tensor decomposition to represent scenes using compact low-rank tensor components, while Instant-NGP [ 28 ] combines a multi-resolution hash table with a fully-fused MLP [ 27 ], significantly accelerating rendering. Despite these advancements, grid-based methods still face challenges in achieving real-time rendering and matching the quality of MLP-based approaches, often due to limited grid resolution or hash collisions. 

Explicit Radiance Fields. Another line of research [ 1, 52 , 48 ] explores replacing implicit neural fields with explicit, point-based scene representations, which can be rendered more efficiently using rasterization techniques. Notably, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [ 15 ] introduced a scene representa-tion based on 3D Gaussians, synthesizing novel views through point-based alpha blending [ 57 ]. This approach achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality and real-time performance. However, the size of models using 3D Gaussian representations is always considerably larger than NeRF-based methods. 

Compressed 3D Gaussian Splatting. While 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) achieves superior rendering performance compared to NeRF-based methods, its significantly larger model size has motivated research into compact representations that preserve its performance advantages. Exist-ing approaches fall into two main categories: (1) parameter compression techniques using vector quantization [ 17 , 29 ], and (2) hybrid neural-3DGS architectures [ 30 , 17 , 6 , 42 ] that uses neural components to predict 3D Gaussian properties instead of explicitly storing them. Closely related to our work, Scaffold-GS [ 23 ] employs anchor points with neural features to predict local Gaussian properties, achieving superior compactness while maintaining rendering quality. Our approach differs fundamentally by predicting all Gaussian properties globally through grid-based neural fields, while augmenting high-frequency details with explicit residual Gaussians. This architecture enables both superior compression ratios and enhanced view quality. Furthermore, our method remains compatible with vector quantization techniques, achieving additional efficiency gains since our explicit Gaus-sians contain far fewer parameters than conventional 3DGS representations. Recently, LocoGS [ 40 ]explores a similar idea by storing Gaussian properties in neural fields. In contrast, our method stores explicit residuals for Gaussian shapes and introduces decoupled neural fields, leading to improved representation of high-frequency scene components. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Preliminary: 3DGS 

In 3DGS, a scene is depicted through a collection of optimizable 3D Gaussians. Each Gaussian is defined by its 3D coordinates p, opacity α, rotation r, scaling factor s, and color c. The opacity α is defined as a scalar value ranging from 0 to 1. The size of the Gaussian in 3D is indicated by scale s.Rotation is expressed as a quaternion r. The color c uses a set of spherical harmonics to account for view-dependent effects, which is then converted into an RGB color before rasterization. 3DGS uses 3D points obtained from Structure-from-Motion libraries like COLMAP [ 38 , 39 ] as initial 3D Gaussians and adaptively densifies them based on the accumulated gradients. During rendering, the 3D Gaussians are ordered by depth, projected onto 2D image planes, and combined using the 3Explicit                                 

> Opacity ∈𝑅
> Explicit
> Scale ∈𝑅
> Explicit
> Color ∈𝑅 3
> Scene Representation
> Neural
> Opacity ∈𝑅
> Neural
> Scale ∈𝑅 3
> Neural
> Rotation ∈𝑅 4
> Neural
> Color ∈𝑅 3
> Explicit
> Opacity ∈𝑅
> Explicit
> Scale ∈𝑅
> Explicit
> Color ∈𝑅 3
> Opacity ∈𝑅
> Scale ∈𝑅 3
> Rotation ∈𝑅 4
> Color ∈𝑅 3
> Hybrid Gaussian
> Background
> Map
> Background Foreground
> Hybrid Rendering
> Add
> Add
> Add
> 𝜎 (⋅)
> Cam.
> Rad. Field
> Geo. Field
> View Rendering
> Geo. Field Rad. Field
> Decoupled Neural Fields
> Sample
> Background sphere
> Explicit Gaussians
> Normalize
> View direction
> 𝜎 (⋅)
> 𝜎 (⋅)
> 3D Points Position
> ∈𝑅 3

Figure 2: Framework overview. Our method represents the scene using grid-based neural fields and a set of compact explicit Gaussians storing only 3D position, 3D diffuse color, isotropic scale, and opacity. We encode the point position into a high-dimensional feature using the neural field and decode it into Gaussian properties with tiny MLP. These Gaussian properties are then aggregated with the explicit Gaussians and integrated into the 3DGS rasterizer. following point-based alpha-blending method. 

C = X

> i∈N

ciαii−1Y

> j=1

(1 − αj ), (1) where C is the final predicted pixel color, N is the set of sorted Gaussians projected onto the pixel. 

3.2 Hybrid Radiance Fields 

Our method represents a scene using 1) a explicit set of 3D Gaussians each holds only 8 parameters, including positions pe ∈ R 3, diffuse color ce ∈ R 3, isotropic scale se ∈ R and opacity αe ∈ R .and 2) a compact grid-based neural field. We choose the multi-resolution hash encoding [28] as our neural field for its efficiency and strong performance. An overview is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

Decoupled neural fields: Empirical results demonstrate that predicting all Gaussian properties through a single neural field fails to achieve satisfactory performance. We attribute this limitation to the weak correlation between Gaussian geometry and appearance attributes, which makes them hard to be learned jointly within a single neural field. To address this issue, we propose a decoupled neural field architecture, which predicts geometry properties (scale, opacity and rotation) and appearance property (view-dependent color) with two separate neural fields Θgeo and Θrad .Given the position of a 3D point pi, we first employ a scene contraction technique similar to that in MipNeRF360 [ 3] to constrain the input coordinates. We first normalize the coordinates using the axis-aligned bounding box (AABB) B0 of the scene, which we defined as the minimum and maximum camera positions. Next, we contract the normalized points to the range (0 , 1) using the following formula: 

contract( pi) = 

(

0.25 · pi + 1 if ∥pi∥ ≤ 10.25 · (2 − 1 

> ∥pi∥

)( pi 

> ∥pi∥

) + 1 otherwise . (2) Note that we contract the points to (0 , 1) instead of (−2, 2) to meet the input requirements for the multi-resolution hash [28]. Then we use the decoupled neural fields to encode it into two high-dimensional features: 

fi 

> rad

= enc( pi; Θ rad ), fi 

> geo

= enc( pi; Θ geo ), (3) where fi 

> rad

and fi 

> geo

are the encoded features. 4Background         

> Sphere
> Viewpoint
> 𝑟
> 𝑝 𝑠
> Foreground 𝐶 𝑓𝑔
> Viewpoint
> Background 𝐶 𝑏 𝑔
> 𝐶 𝑓𝑔 𝐶 𝑏𝑔 𝐶 𝑓𝑔 +(1−𝛼 )𝐶 𝑏𝑔
> 𝑝 𝑠

… 

> Viewpoint
> View
> Frustum
> (a) Visibility pre -culling (b) Hybrid rendering

Figure 3: (a) Visibility Pre-Culling. We first determine whether each Gaussian lies within the current view frustum before applying neural field decoding. (b) Hybrid Rendering Pipeline. For each camera ray, we: (1) compute its intersection point pswith a background sphere, (2) sample the radiance field at ps, and (3) composite the foreground and background colors using alpha blending. The encoded features are then decoded into 3D Gaussian properties using two MLP-based decoders. For view-independent properties of opacity α, scale s and rotation r, we directly decoded them as: 

(αn, s n, rn) = dec( fi

> enc

, Φgeo ) (4) To account for the view-dependent effects of Gaussian colors, we incorporate a view direction component to the MLP input using positional encoding techniques similar to NeRF-based methods [ 28 ,3]. The view direction encoding is calculated as: 

fi 

> dir

= PE( pi − pcam 

∥pi − pcam ∥2

), (5) where PE( ·) is positional encoding technique [26]. The view-dependent color is decoded as: 

cn = dec( fi 

> enc

⊕ fi

> dir

, Φc), (6) where ⊕ denotes tensor concatenation. Note the derived neural Gaussian properties (αn, rn, s n, cn)

here are raw outputs from MLP without activations. 

Aggregation with explicit Gaussians: Grid-based neural fields often overlook high-frequency scene components such as intrinsic structures. We address this problem by aggregating the predicted properties from neural fields with explicit properties stored in each Gaussian. Similar to 3DGS, we apply the sigmoid function to activate opacity and color, and use a normalization function for rotation: 

α = σ(αn + αe),

c = σ(cn + ce),

r = Normalize( rn),s = σ(sn + se) (7) where σ denotes the sigmoid function, and Normalize( ·) denotes L2 normalization of the quaternion. The aggregated Gaussian properties (α, r, s, c) are then fed to the 3DGS rasterizer. 

3.3 Hybrid Rendering Visibility pre-culling: To reduce the computational overhead of querying the neural fields, we eliminate points that will not be projected onto the image plane before deriving their properties using the neural fields. An illustration of the visibility pre-culling process is provided in Fig. 3(a). Specifically, given a point pi and a camera viewpoint, we calculate the camera-space coordinates of the point pi using the camera’s rotation matrix R ∈ R 3×3 and translation vector t ∈ R 3 as follows: 

pi = Rp i + t. (8) We retain a point only if it is projected within the image frame, determined by the condition: 

(|xi| ≤ 1 + tol) ∧ (|yi| ≤ 1 + tol) , (9) where xi and yi are the first and second elements of pi, respectively. We incorporate a tolerance band 

tol in the culling process to preserve Gaussians that are partially projected outside but still intersect 5with the image plane. Additionally, we discard Gaussians positioned too close to the image plane, as they may introduce optimization instability. 

Background rendering: 3DGS often struggle to effectively densify and optimize extremely distant objects, frequently resulting in blurry backgrounds. To address this issue, we propose a hybrid rendering technique that leverages the radiance field Θrad to predict the background color. An illustration of the background rendering process is provided in Fig. 3(b). Unlike [ 18 ], which predicts the background as points at infinity, we construct a background sphere with large radius r. For each ray projected from a given camera viewpoint, we compute the intersection point ps between the ray and the sphere. We then use the radiance field and decoder to predict the color at point ps. The background color Cbg combines the background point color with remaining visibility after accumulating the foreground Gaussians: 

Cbg =

> N

Y

> i=1

(1 − αi)cs. (10) Finally, the pixel color is obtained by combining the foreground and background colors: 

C = Cfg + Cbg , (11) where Cfg is given by Eq. 1. In the rendering stage, we predict Cbg only for pixels with an accumulated transmittance T = QN

> i=1

(1 − αi) lower than a threshold τT , thereby increasing rendering speed. 

3.4 Optimization 

Our method is optimized using the same L1 loss and SSIM loss [46] as the original 3DGS: 

L = (1 − λ)L1 + λLssim , (12) where λ is the weight for SSIM loss. Similar the original 3DGS, we periodically reset the explicit opacity to a small value during densification and prune Gaussians with low opacity. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Dataset: We conduct experiments on three standard real-world datasets: MipNeRF360 [ 3 ], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ], and Deep Blending [ 13 ], which together encompass a total of 13 scenes. Additionally, we utilize the NeRF Synthetic dataset [ 26 ], featuring 8 object-centered scenes. Furthermore, we examine two large-scale urban datasets captured by drones: Mill19 [ 44 ] and Urbanscene3D [ 20 ], which collectively include 4 scenes. In total, our experiments span 25 scenes across various datasets. 

Baselines: For the MipNeRF360 [ 3], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ], and Deep Blending [ 13 ] datasets, we compare our method with the MLP-based NeRF method MipNeRF360 [ 3], two popular grid-based NeRF methods—Plenoxels [ 8] and Instant-NGP [ 28 ]—as well as the original 3DGS [ 15 ] and its advanced derivative, Scaffold-GS [ 23 ]. For the NeRF Synthetic dataset [ 26 ], we compare our method with MipNeRF [ 2], Instant-NGP [ 28 ], 3DGS [ 15 ], and Scaffold-GS [ 23 ]. For the urban-scale datasets [ 44 , 20 ], we evaluate our method with two prominent NeRF-based techniques: MegaN-eRF [ 44 ] and SwitchNeRF [ 25 ], in addition to 3DGS [ 15 ] and Scaffold-GS [ 23 ]. To demonstrate the compactness of our method, we also compare a compressed version of our approach with five recent 3DGS compression methods [22, 17, 29, 6, 11, 49]. 

Implementation: Our method is built on top of the original 3DGS implementation. For the neural fields, we adopt multi-resolution hash encodings [ 28 ] with 16 levels, where each hash entry stores a feature of size 2. The maximum hash size per level for the radiance field is set to 217 for synthetic scenes, 218 for standard scenes, and 221 for large scenes. The hash size for the geometry field is half that of the radiance field. For the decoder, we use a fully-fused MLP [ 27 ] with 2 hidden layers, each containing 64 neurons. For background rendering, we set the transmittance threshold τT to 0.2 and 

r = 100 for all scenes. All other hyperparameters remain consistent with the original 3DGS. All experiments are conducted on one NVIDIA 3090 GPU. 

Evaluation metrics: We evaluate rendering quality of novel view synthesis using PSNR, SSIM [ 46 ], and LPIPS [56]. We also report the rendering frame rate (FPS) and model size in MB. 6MipNeRF -360  3DGS  Scaffold -GS  Ours  Ground Truth Figure 4: Qualitative comparisons of our method against previous approaches on standard real-world datasets [ 3, 16 , 13 ]. The selected scenes include the bicycle and counter scenes from the MipNeRF360 dataset [ 2 ], the playroom scene from the DeepBlending dataset [ 13 ], and the truck scene from the Tanks & Temples dataset [16]. Arrows and insets are used to highlight key differences. Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of our method compared to previous works on the MipNeRF360 [ 3], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ], and Deep Blending [ 13 ] datasets. We consistently achieve the best rendering quality, with model sizes comparable to NeRF-based methods and rendering speeds similar to 3DGS-based methods. The best results are indicated in bold , while the second-best results are underlined.                                                                                                            

> Dataset Mip-NeRF360 [3] Tanks&Temples [16] Deep Blending [13] PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓FPS ↑Size(MB) ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓FPS ↑Size(MB) ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓FPS ↑Size(MB) ↓
> Plenoxels [8] 23.08 0.626 0.463 6.79 2150 21.08 0.719 0.379 13.0 2355 23.06 0.795 0.510 11.2 2764 Instant-NGP [28] 25.59 0.699 0.331 9.43 48 21.92 0.745 0.305 14.4 48 24.96 0.817 0.390 2.79 48 M-NeRF360 [3] 27.69 0.792 0.237 0.06 8.6 22.22 0.759 0.257 0.14 8.6 29.40 0.901 0.245 0.09 8.6
> 3DGS [15] 27.21 0.815 0.214 117 734 23.14 0.841 0.183 130 411 29.41 0.903 0.243 112 676 Scaffold-GS [23] 27.39 0.806 0.252 86 244 23.96 0.853 0.177 94 86.5 30.21 0.906 0.254 120 66 Ours 27.78 0.816 0.211 102 49 24.02 0.844 0.176 106 39 30.37 0.910 0.241 114 34

4.2 Results and Evaluation Standard real-world scenes: Table 1 presents the quantitative results evaluated on real-world scenes. Our method achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality while maintaining a compact model size and real-time rendering speed. Compared to 3DGS [ 15 ], our method delivers superior rendering quality while reducing the model size by over 12 times and maintaining comparable rendering speed. When compared to Scaffold-GS [ 23 ], our method shows significant improvements in rendering quality, with model sizes 1.5 to 5 times smaller and faster rendering speeds. Table 2: Comparison on the NeRF Synthetic dataset [26]. PSNR ↑ Size(MB) ↓          

> MipNeRF [2] 32.63 2.4
> Instant-NGP [50] 33.18 12 3DGS [15] 33.32 53 Scaffold-GS [23] 33.68 23 Ours 33.72 13

Qualitative comparisons between our method and previous ap-proaches are illustrated in Fig. 4. Our method excels in capturing fine details, as demonstrated in the bicycle , counter , and playroom 

scenes, while also achieving better background modeling, as seen in the truck scenes. 

Object-centered synthetic scenes: Table. 2 presents the qualitative results on the NeRF Synthetic [ 26 ] dataset. Our method achieves the best results among all the comparison methods, with a size slightly larger than Instant-NGP [28] and over 4 times smaller than 3DGS. 

Large-scale real-world scenes: Table. 3 presents the qualitative results for two urban-scale datasets [ 44 , 20 ]. Our approach achieves superior rendering quality with a more compact model size 7Table 3: Quantitative evaluation of our method compared to previous works on two urban-scale datasets: Mill19 [ 44 ] and Urbanscene3D [ 20 ] dataset. Our method achieves the best rendering quality 

among all compared methods, being 4 to 7 times smaller than 3DGS-based methods and over 7000 

times faster than NeRF-based methods. Dataset Mill19 [44] Urbanscene3D [20] PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ FPS ↑ Size(MB) ↓ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ FPS ↑ Size(MB) ↓                                                  

> MegaNeRF [44] 22.50 0.55 0.510 <0.01 32 23.84 0.699 0.440 <0.01 32 SwitchNeRF [25] 22.93 0.571 0.485 <0.01 17 24.54 0.725 0.418 <0.01 17
> 3DGS [15] 22.41 0.695 0.348 81 1566 21.41 0.763 0.287 84 935 Scaffold-GS [23] 22.33 0.658 0.339 36 560 20.25 0.729 0.295 34 435 Ours 23.52 0.709 0.319 75 215 24.68 0.791 0.272 77 202

Table 4: Quantitative evaluation of our method compared to previous 3DGS compression work on the MipNeRF-360 dataset [3]. PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Size(MB) ↓                        

> Niedermayr et al. [31] 26.98 0.801 0.238 28.84 Lee et al. [17] 27.08 0.798 0.247 48.80 Girish et al. [11] 27.15 0.808 0.228 68.10 Papantonakis et al. [35] 27.1 0.809 0.226 25.40 Chen et al. [6] 27.59 0.808 0.234 22.50 Ours 27.66 0.814 0.210 18.04

Table 5: Ablation studies of the key compo-nents of our method on the Tanks & Temples dataset [16]. PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ FPS ↑ Size(MB) ↓                              

> Full model 24.07 0.847 0.175 106 41 w/o Decouple. 23.78 0.840 0.187 101 37 w/o Explicit 23.45 0.829 0.196 121 27 w/o Neural 22.22 0.797 0.266 127 14
> w/o Background 23.43 0.838 0.19 112 41 w/o Pre-culling 24.06 0.847 0.175 27 41

compared to 3DGS. Notably, the gap of rendering speed between our method and 3DGS narrows as the number of rendered points increases. In contrast, Scaffold-GS experiences a significant decline in speed as the number of Gaussians grows. A qualitative comparison is can be found in the supple-mentary materials, where our method demonstrates a better ability to capture fine details and handle lighting variations, where 3DGS and Scaffold-GS suffers from blurs and artifacts. 

Model compression: Though our method does not inherently include post-processing compression techniques, it remains compatible with most existing 3DGS compression approaches [ 22 , 17 ]. Our representation achieves better performance by storing significantly fewer explicit Gaussian parameters. To evaluate our method’s compactness, we apply post-processing techniques similar to [ 17 ], including: (1) storing point positions as half-precision tensors, (2) applying residual vector quantization (R-VQ) and Huffman encoding to explicit Gaussian properties, and (3) employing Huffman encoding with 8-bit min-max quantization for the hash table (see supplementary materials for details). As shown in Table 4, our compressed results outperform five state-of-the-art 3DGS compression methods in both model size and rendering quality. Notably, while conventional 3DGS compression methods typically sacrifice rendering quality for storage efficiency, our approach maintains superior visual fidelity even after aggressive compression. 

4.3 Model Analysis Decoupled neural fields: We conduct a comparative analysis between our decoupled neural fields approach and a single neural field that predicts all Gaussian parameters simultaneously. To maintain experimental fairness, we configure the maximum hash size of the single neural field to be 218 ,which leads to a slightly larger parameter count as our decoupled architecture. As demonstrated in Table 5, the single neural field exhibits consistent degradation across all image quality metrics. This limitation arises from the inherent challenge of using a single network to concurrently represent both geometric and appearance properties of 3D Gaussians, resulting in compromised rendering fidelity and inaccurate geometry such as gaps and holes, as visually confirmed in Fig. 5. 

Hybrid rendering: We evaluate our model using two rendering approaches: (1) our proposed hybrid rendering pipeline and (2) conventional 3DGS rasterization. Quantitative results in Table 5 show that disabling background rendering results in significantly degraded visual quality, despite offering only marginal improvements in rendering speed. This finding supports our hypothesis that standard 3DGS approaches struggle to properly densify and optimize distant objects. As shown in Fig. 6, our qualitative analysis further reveals that background rendering plays a crucial role in maintaining high-frequency details for distant scene elements, with particularly notable of fine cloud structures. 

Neural Gaussians: Our method leverages neural fields to predict the anisotropic shape and view-dependent color of 3D Gaussians. Without these neural components, our framework falls back to 8w/o decouple  Full model Figure 5: Ablation of decoupled neural fields. 

Using a single neural field to predict Gaussian properties causes gaps and holes. w/ o background  Full model 

Figure 6: Ablation of background rendering. 

The learnable background map improves the qual-ity of distant objects (see the clouds and sky). w/o explicit color  w/o explicit scale  

> w/o explicit opacity Full model

Figure 7: Detailed ablation studies of each of the explicit Gaussian properties. 

Figure 8: Comparison of PSNR and model size changes during the training phase. isotropic Gaussians with diffuse shading which has limited representation capacity, leading to a noticeable degradation in novel view synthesis quality, as demonstrated in Tab. 5. 

Visibility pre-culling: As demonstrated in Table 5, our frustum pre-culling strategy achieves a 3.9× rendering speed improvement while maintaining equivalent visual quality for real-world 360° scenes, which represent our primary target scenario. 

Training time: We analyze the training time of our method and compare it with other baseline methods in Fig. 8. Our method achieves significantly faster convergence, while maintaining a substantially smaller model size compared to baselines. Table 6: Detailed ablation studies of each of the explicit Gaussian properties. PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓            

> Full model 30.37 0.910 0.241
> w/o color. 29.18 0.896 0.251 w/o scale 28.74 0.865 0.282 w/o opacity 30.21 0.902 0.247

Explicit Gaussians: In Table 5, we evaluate the impact of removing all explicit Gaussian properties except posi-tions, which are retained as they are required for neural field queries. We analyze the contribution of each explicit Gaussian component—color, scale, and opacity—through systematic ablation. Visual comparisons on the Deep Blending dataset [ 13 ] are presented in Fig. 7. Remov-ing explicit color components causes noticeable quality deterioration, as the neural network struggles to model illumination variations and may produce unnatural colors due to hash collisions. The absence of explicit scale significantly impairs reconstruction of thin structures like edges and corners. We also observes removing of explicit scale often leads to instability in training. Finally, removing explicit opacity results in floaters, which also degrades output quality. 

5 Conclusion 

We have presented Hybrid Radiance Fields (HyRF), a novel approach that bridges the gap between the rendering efficiency of 3D Gaussian Splatting and the compact representation of neural fields. Our work addresses the fundamental limitations of current novel view synthesis methods by introducing a hybrid explicit-implicit representation that preserves high-frequency details, a decoupled neural field architecture that separately optimizes geometric and appearance properties, and a hybrid rendering pipeline that effectively combines the strengths of both representations. Our approach resolves the memory bottleneck of explicit Gaussian representations without sacrificing their rendering quality or 9speed advantages. As novel view synthesis continues to play a crucial role in diverse applications from virtual production to autonomous systems, we believe our contributions represent a significant step toward practical, high-quality real-time neural rendering. 

Limitations: As in the original 3DGS, our present method does not address the aliasing issue [ 54 ]and sometimes produces inaccurate surface reconstruction. Moreover, the neural field components in HyRF currently benefit from high-end GPUs for high rendering speed. Achieving comparable efficiency on web platforms or integrated graphics remains an open challenge for the community. 

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

The work is supported in part by the Early Career Scheme of the Research Grants Council (RGC) of the Hong Kong SAR under grant No. 26202321, ITF PRP/046/24FX , SAIL Research Project, and HKUST-Zeekr Collaborative Research Fund. 

References 

[1] Kara-Ali Aliev, Artem Sevastopolsky, Maria Kolos, Dmitry Ulyanov, and Victor Lempitsky. Neural point-based graphics. In ECCV , 2020. [2] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields. In CVPR , 2021. [3] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In CVPR , 2022. [4] Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Andreas Geiger, Jingyi Yu, and Hao Su. Tensorf: Tensorial radiance fields. In ECCV , 2022. [5] Youyu Chen, Junjun Jiang, Kui Jiang, Xiao Tang, Zhihao Li, Xianming Liu, and Yinyu Nie. Dashgaussian: Optimizing 3d gaussian splatting in 200 seconds. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 11146–11155, 2025. [6] Yihang Chen, Qianyi Wu, Weiyao Lin, Mehrtash Harandi, and Jianfei Cai. Hac: Hash-grid assisted context for 3d gaussian splatting compression. In ECCV , 2025. [7] Guangchi Fang and Bing Wang. Mini-splatting2: Building 360 scenes within minutes via aggressive gaussian densification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12788 , 2024. [8] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. In CVPR , 2022. [9] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Giacomo Meanti, Frederik Rahbæk Warburg, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. K-planes: Explicit radiance fields in space, time, and appearance. In CVPR , 2023. [10] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun. Vision meets robotics: The kitti dataset. The international journal of robotics research , 32(11):1231–1237, 2013. [11] Sharath Girish, Kamal Gupta, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Eagles: Efficient accelerated 3d gaussians with lightweight encodings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04564 , 2023. [12] Ayaan Haque, Matthew Tancik, Alexei A Efros, Aleksander Holynski, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Instruct-nerf2nerf: Editing 3d scenes with instructions. In CVPR , 2023. [13] Peter Hedman, Julien Philip, True Price, Jan-Michael Frahm, George Drettakis, and Gabriel Brostow. Deep blending for free-viewpoint image-based rendering. TOG , 2018. [14] Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided object generation with dream fields. In CVPR , 2022. [15] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ToG , 2023. 10 [16] Arno Knapitsch, Jaesik Park, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. Tanks and temples: Bench-marking large-scale scene reconstruction. TOG , 2017. [17] Joo Chan Lee, Daniel Rho, Xiangyu Sun, Jong Hwan Ko, and Eunbyung Park. Compact 3d gaussian representation for radiance field. In CVPR , 2024. [18] Wanzhang Li, Fukun Yin, Wen Liu, Yiying Yang, Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Gang Yu, and Jiayuan Fan. Unbounded-gs: Extending 3d gaussian splatting with hybrid representation for unbounded large-scale scene reconstruction. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [19] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution text-to-3d content creation. In CVPR , 2023. [20] Liqiang Lin, Yilin Liu, Yue Hu, Xingguang Yan, Ke Xie, and Hui Huang. Capturing, recon-structing, and simulating: the urbanscene3d dataset. In ECCV , 2022. [21] Lingjie Liu, Jiatao Gu, Kyaw Zaw Lin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Christian Theobalt. Neural sparse voxel fields. NeurIPS , 2020. [22] Xiangrui Liu, Xinju Wu, Pingping Zhang, Shiqi Wang, Zhu Li, and Sam Kwong. Compgs: Efficient 3d scene representation via compressed gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09458 , 2024. [23] Tao Lu, Mulin Yu, Linning Xu, Yuanbo Xiangli, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. Scaffold-gs: Structured 3d gaussians for view-adaptive rendering. In CVPR , 2024. [24] Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Jonathan T Barron, Alexey Dosovit-skiy, and Daniel Duckworth. Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for unconstrained photo collections. In CVPR , 2021. [25] Zhenxing Mi and Dan Xu. Switch-nerf: Learning scene decomposition with mixture of experts for large-scale neural radiance fields. In ICLR , 2022. [26] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. ECCV ,2021. [27] Thomas Müller. tiny-cuda-nn, 2021. [28] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. TOG , 2022. [29] KL Navaneet, Kossar Pourahmadi Meibodi, Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani, and Hamed Pirsi-avash. Compact3d: Compressing gaussian splat radiance field models with vector quantization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18159 , 2023. [30] KL Navaneet, Kossar Pourahmadi Meibodi, Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani, and Hamed Pir-siavash. Compgs: Smaller and faster gaussian splatting with vector quantization. In ECCV ,2024. [31] Simon Niedermayr, Josef Stumpfegger, and Rüdiger Westermann. Compressed 3d gaussian splatting for accelerated novel view synthesis. In CVPR , 2024. [32] Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional genera-tive neural feature fields. In CVPR , 2021. [33] Takashi Otonari, Satoshi Ikehata, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. Entity-nerf: Detecting and removing moving entities in urban scenes. In CVPR , 2024. [34] Jingyi Pan, Zipeng Wang, and Lin Wang. Co-occ: Coupling explicit feature fusion with volume rendering regularization for multi-modal 3d semantic occupancy prediction. RAL , 2024. 11 [35] Panagiotis Papantonakis, Georgios Kopanas, Bernhard Kerbl, Alexandre Lanvin, and George Drettakis. Reducing the memory footprint of 3d gaussian splatting. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques , 7(1):1–17, 2024. [36] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988 , 2022. [37] Christian Reiser, Rick Szeliski, Dor Verbin, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Andreas Geiger, Jon Barron, and Peter Hedman. Merf: Memory-efficient radiance fields for real-time view synthesis in unbounded scenes. TOG , 2023. [38] Johannes Lutz Schönberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-from-motion revisited. In CVPR ,2016. [39] Johannes Lutz Schönberger, Enliang Zheng, Marc Pollefeys, and Jan-Michael Frahm. Pixelwise view selection for unstructured multi-view stereo. In ECCV , 2016. [40] Seungjoo Shin, Jaesik Park, and Sunghyun Cho. Locality-aware gaussian compression for fast and high-quality rendering. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [41] Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel grid optimization: Super-fast convergence for radiance fields reconstruction. In CVPR , 2022. [42] Xiangyu Sun, Joo Chan Lee, Daniel Rho, Jong Hwan Ko, Usman Ali, and Eunbyung Park. F-3dgs: Factorized coordinates and representations for 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17083 , 2024. [43] Adam Tonderski, Carl Lindström, Georg Hess, William Ljungbergh, Lennart Svensson, and Christoffer Petersson. Neurad: Neural rendering for autonomous driving. In CVPR , 2024. [44] Haithem Turki, Deva Ramanan, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan. Mega-nerf: Scalable construc-tion of large-scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs. In CVPR , 2022. [45] Yuxin Wang, Wayne Wu, and Dan Xu. Learning unified decompositional and compositional nerf for editable novel view synthesis. In CVPR , 2023. [46] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. TIP , 2004. [47] Silvan Weder, Guillermo Garcia-Hernando, Aron Monszpart, Marc Pollefeys, Gabriel J Brostow, Michael Firman, and Sara Vicente. Removing objects from neural radiance fields. In CVPR ,2023. [48] Olivia Wiles, Georgia Gkioxari, Richard Szeliski, and Justin Johnson. Synsin: End-to-end view synthesis from a single image. In CVPR , 2020. [49] Minye Wu and Tinne Tuytelaars. Implicit gaussian splatting with efficient multi-level tri-plane representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10041 , 2024. [50] Qiangeng Xu, Zexiang Xu, Julien Philip, Sai Bi, Zhixin Shu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and Ulrich Neumann. Point-nerf: Point-based neural radiance fields. In CVPR , 2022. [51] Ziyi Yang, Xinyu Gao, Yang-Tian Sun, Yihua Huang, Xiaoyang Lyu, Wen Zhou, Shaohui Jiao, Xiaojuan Qi, and Xiaogang Jin. Spec-gaussian: Anisotropic view-dependent appearance for 3d gaussian splatting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:61192–61216, 2024. [52] Wang Yifan, Felice Serena, Shihao Wu, Cengiz Öztireli, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Differen-tiable surface splatting for point-based geometry processing. TOG , 2019. [53] Alex Yu, Ruilong Li, Matthew Tancik, Hao Li, Ren Ng, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoctrees for real-time rendering of neural radiance fields. In CVPR , 2021. [54] Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Binbin Huang, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. Mip-splatting: Alias-free 3d gaussian splatting. In CVPR , 2024. 12 [55] Zehao Yu, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. Gaussian opacity fields: Efficient adaptive surface reconstruction in unbounded scenes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) , 43(6):1–13, 2024. [56] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreason-able effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR , 2018. [57] Matthias Zwicker, Hanspeter Pfister, Jeroen Van Baar, and Markus Gross. Ewa splatting. TVCG ,2002. 13 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please refer to our methodology and experiments sections. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Please refer to the limitation section in our conclusion. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [Yes] 14 Justification: Our derivation for can be found in our method section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We’ll release our full code to the public. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 15 Answer: [Yes] Justification: We’ll release our full code to the public. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We specify all the training and test details in the experiment section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We ran our experiments for three times and reports the average scores. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. 16 • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We report the computer resources in our experiment section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our research conform with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The potential societal impacts are discussed in our conclusion section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to 17 generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: [NA] Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All our used assets are open-sourced. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? 18 Answer: [Yes] Justification: We submit our code together with our supplementary results. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] 19 Justification: The core method development in this research does not involve LLMs. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 20 A Technical Appendices and Supplementary Material 

A.1 Scene Contraction 

We employ a scene contraction technique similar to that in MipNeRF360 [ 3 ] to constrain the input coordinates of the multi-resolution hash to the range (0, 1). First, we normalize the coordinates using the axis-aligned bounding box (AABB) B0 of the scene. For NeRF synthetic dataset, we set the minimum and maximum and the AABB to be -1.3 and 1.3. For standard dataset, we define the AABB using the minimum and maximum camera positions. For large-scale datasets, we use the points between the 1st and 99th percentiles of the initial point clouds to establish the AABB. The normalized point p′ is derived as follows: 

p′ = pB0

. (13) Next, we contract the normalized points to the range (0 , 1) using the following formula: 

contact( p′) = 

(0.25 · p′ + 1 if ∥p′∥ ≤ 10.25 · (2 − 1 

> ∥p′∥

)( p′ 

> ∥p′∥

) + 1 otherwise , (14) where contact() is the scene contraction function. Note that we contract the points to (0 , 1) instead of (−2, 2) to meet the input requirements for the multi-resolution hash [28]. 

A.2 Derivation of Ray-Sphere Intersection 

In this section, we provide the detailed derivation of the ray-sphere intersection, which is used in the hybrid rendering module to compute background points. Given a ray r(t) = o + td and a sphere centered at the origin with radius r, we substitute the ray equation into the sphere equation: 

(o + td) · (o + td) = r2, (15) which expands to: 

o · o + 2 t(o · d) + t2(d · d) = r2. (16) Let A = d · d, B = 2( o · d), and C = o · o − r2. The equation then simplifies to a quadratic in t:

At 2 + Bt + C = 0 . (17) The solutions to this quadratic equation are given by: 

t = −B ± √B2 − 4AC 

2A . (18) Since the ray originates inside the sphere, the equation always yields two real solutions. We select the positive solution, as it corresponds to the intersection point in the forward direction of the ray. 

A.3 Ablation for View-dependent Appearance Modeling 

We provide an additional ablation study that compares two approaches (SH Coefficients for "high rank per Gaussian spherical harmonics parameters" and Hybrid for "MLP and integration of neural field and explicit Gaussian") for view-dependent appearance modeling, as shown in Table. 7. Our hybrid approach not only achieves significant reduction in model size, but also achieves slightly better visual quality compared with using SH coefficients. This comparison demonstrates that our hybrid approach provides a compact and more powerful way in modeling view-dependent appearance. Table 7: Ablation study of SH and MLP based appearance modeling. PNSR SSIM LPIPS Size (MB) SH Coefficients 30.12 0.908 0.243 267 Hybrid (Ours) 30.37 0.910 0.241 34 

21 A.4 Evaluation in Street Scenes 

To evaluate HyRF’s performance in street scenes, we conducted experiments on the KITTI [ 10 ]dataset (2011_09_26_drive_0002 sequence), as shown in Table. 10. Our method achieves similar visual quality compared with 3DGS while being over 10 times smaller in model size. After adding the background rendering technique, our complete method shows consistent quality improvements, particularly for distant objects and sky regions. Table 8: Evaluation in street scenes on the KITTI [10] dataset . PNSR SSIM LPIPS Size (MB) 3DGS 19.37 0.665 0.272 472 HyRF (w/o background) 19.42 0.660 0.273 36.7 HyRF (Full) 19.56 0.667 0.273 36.4 

A.5 Number of Explicit Gaussians 

The significant memory savings of HyRF come from both decreased per-Gaussian storage and reduced number of Gaussians. As stated in the paper, HyRF only stores 8 parameters per-Gaussian, in contrast to 59 parameters as in 3DGS. Moreover, HyRF naturally converges to fewer Gaussians while maintaining quality. As shown in Table. 11, HyRF achieves a 24-45% reduction in the number of explicit Gaussians compared to 3DGS on three dataset (MipNeRF360, Tanks&Temples and DeepBlending), without additional pruning techniques. We hypothesize this reduction of number of Gaussians stems from two key factors: (1) Faster convergence during training, reducing the need for aggressive densification, and (2) The neural field’s ability to represent view-dependent effects without requiring excessive Gaussians. Table 9: Comparison of number of explicit Gaussians. MipNeRF360 Tanks&Temples DeepBlending 3DGS 3.31M 1.84M 2.81M HyRF 2.52M 1.01M 1.74M 

A.6 Additional Comparison with Recent 3DGS-based Methods 

We conduct additional comparison experiments with several recent 3DGS-based methods, namely GOF [ 55 ], Spec-GS [ 51 ], Mini-Splatting2 [ 7 ] and DashGaussian [ 5 ] on the DeepBlending [ 13 ]dataset. To provide a more comprehensive evaluation, we have expanded the comparison table to include rendering speed (FPS), training time (Time), peak GPU memory usage (Memory), and model storage size (Size) across state-of-the-art methods. 

A.7 Additional Comparison on Specular Scenes 

we have conducted additional quantitative comparisons using the anisotropic synthetic dataset from Spec-GS [ 51 ], which features 8 object-centered scenes with strong specular highlights. Compared with 3DGS, HyRF achieves significantly better rendering quality ( ↑1.58 dB PSNR) while using 82% less memory. The improved performance highlights the benefits of using MLPs over SH coefficients for modeling high-frequency view-dependent effects. Table 10: Comparison with recent 3DGS-based methods. PSNR SSIM LPIPS FPS Time (min) Memory (GB) Size (MB) 3DGS 29.41 0.903 0.243 112 14.4 5.54 676 GOF 30.42 0.914 0.237 96 20.3 6.62 721 Spec-GS 30.57 0.912 0.234 107 17.8 5.79 765 MiniSplatting2 30.08 0.912 0.240 136 2.75 3.65 155 DashGaussian 30.02 0.907 0.248 132 2.62 4.32 465 HyRF 30.37 0.910 0.241 114 12.5 1.83 34 22 Table 11: Comparison on the Spec-GS dataset. PSNR SSIM LPIPS Size (MB) 3DGS 33.83 0.966 0.062 47 HyRF (Ours) 35.41 0.970 0.053 8.2 

A.8 Additional Qualitative Comparisons 

In Fig. 9, we show the Additional qualitative comparisons of our method against previous approaches on standard real-world datasets. Ground Truth  Instant -NGP  3D -GS  Scaffold -GS  Ours 

Figure 9: Additional qualitative comparisons of our method against previous approaches on standard real-world datasets. 

A.9 Per-scene Metrics 

Table. 12-15 present per-scene metrics for MipNeRF360 [ 3], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ] and Deep Blending [ 13 ] datasets. Table. 16 and 17 provide per-scene metrics for the per-scene metrics for NeRF Synthetic dataset [ 26 ]. Finally, Table. 18 lists per-scene metrics for Mill19 [ 44 ] and Urbanscene3D [20] datasets. 23 Table 12: PSNR scores for scenes in Mip-NeRF360 [ 3], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ] and Deep Blend-ing [13] datasets. dataset Mip-NeRF360 [3] Tanks&Temples [16] Deep Blending [13] scene bicycle flowers garden stump treehill room counter kitchen bonsai mean truck train mean drjohnson playroom mean Plenoxels [8] 21.91 20.09 23.49 20.66 22.24 27.59 23.62 23.42 24.66 23.08 23.22 18.92 21.08 23.14 22.98 23.06 Instant-NGP [28] 22.17 20.65 25.06 23.46 22.37 29.69 26.69 29.47 30.68 25.59 23.38 20.45 21.92 28.25 21.66 24.96 M-NeRF360 [3] 24.37 21.73 26.98 26.40 22.87 31.63 29.55 32.23 33.46 27.69 24.91 19.52 22.22 29.14 29.65 29.40 3DGS [15] 25.25 21.52 27.41 26.55 22.49 30.63 28.70 30.32 31.98 27.21 25.19 21.10 23.14 28.77 30.04 29.41 Scaffold-GS [23] 24.50 21.38 27.17 26.27 22.44 31.93 29.34 31.30 32.70 27.39 25.77 22.15 23.96 29.80 30.62 30.21 Ours 25.45 21.56 27.54 26.19 22.89 31.98 29.4 32.01 33.04 27.78 25.92 22.12 24.02 29.72 31.02 30.37 

Table 13: SSIM scores for scenes in Mip-NeRF360 [ 3 ], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ] and Deep Blending [ 13 ]datasets. dataset Mip-NeRF360 [3] Tanks&Temples [16] Deep Blending [13] scene bicycle flowers garden stump treehill room counter kitchen bonsai mean truck train mean drjohnson playroom mean Plenoxels [8] 0.496 0.431 0.606 0.523 0.509 0.842 0.759 0.648 0.814 0.626 0.774 0.663 0.719 0.787 0.802 0.795 Instant-NGP [28] 0.512 0.486 0.701 0.594 0.542 0.871 0.817 0.858 0.906 0.699 0.800 0.689 0.745 0.854 0.779 0.817 M-NeRF360 [3] 0.685 0.584 0.809 0.745 0.631 0.910 0.892 0.917 0.938 0.792 0.857 0.660 0.759 0.901 0.900 0.901 3DGS [15] 0.771 0.605 0.868 0.775 0.638 0.914 0.905 0.922 0.938 0.815 0.879 0.802 0.841 0.899 0.906 0.903 Scaffold-GS [23] 0.705 0.607 0.842 0.784 0.620 0.925 0.914 0.928 0.946 0.806 0.883 0.822 0.853 0.901 0.904 0.906 Ours 0.762 0.611 0.854 0.756 0.640 0.930 0.915 0.927 0.950 0.816 0.883 0.806 0.844 0.904 0.916 0.910 

Table 14: LPIPS scores for scenes in Mip-NeRF360 [ 3 ], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ] and Deep Blend-ing [13] datasets. dataset Mip-NeRF360 [3] Tanks&Temples [16] Deep Blending [13] scene bicycle flowers garden stump treehill room counter kitchen bonsai mean truck train mean drjohnson playroom mean Plenoxels [8] 0.506 0.521 0.3864 0.503 0.540 0.4186 0.441 0.447 0.398 0.463 0.335 0.422 0.379 0.521 0.499 0.510 Instant-NGP [28] 0.446 0.441 0.257 0.421 0.450 0.261 0.306 0.195 0.205 0.331 0.249 0.360 0.305 0.352 0.428 0.390 M-NeRF360 [3] 0.301 0.344 0.170 0.261 0.339 0.211 0.204 0.127 0.176 0.237 0.159 0.354 0.257 0.237 0.252 0.245 3DGS [15] 0.205 0.336 0.103 0.210 0.317 0.220 0.204 0.129 0.205 0.214 0.148 0.218 0.183 0.244 0.241 0.243 Scaffold-GS [23] 0.306 0.362 0.146 0.284 0.346 0.202 0.191 0.126 0.185 0.252 0.147 0.206 0.177 0.250 0.258 0.254 Ours 0.237 0.301 0.144 0.236 0.328 0.189 0.179 0.124 0.167 0.211 0.140 0.212 0.176 0.242 0.239 0.241 

Table 15: Model size (MB) for scenes in Mip-NeRF360 [ 3 ], Tanks & Temples [ 16 ] and Deep Blending [13] datasets. dataset Mip-NeRF360 [3] Tanks&Temples [16] Deep Blending [13] scene bicycle flowers garden stump treehill room counter kitchen bonsai mean truck train mean drjohnson playroom mean 3DGS [15] 1291 1045 1268 1034 872 327 261 414 281 634 578 240 411 715 515 676 Scaffold-GS [23] 248 217 271 493 209 133 194 173 258 244 107 66 87 69 63 66 Ours 68 55 54 51 61 41 39 38 38 49 41 37 39 48 36 34 

Table 16: PSNR scores for scenes in Synthetic NeRF dataset [26]. scene Mic Chair Ship Materials Lego Drums Ficus Hotdog mean 3DGS [15] 35.36 35.83 30.80 30.00 35.78 26.15 34.87 37.72 33.32 Scaffold-GS [23] 37.25 35.28 31.17 30.65 35.69 26.44 35.21 37.73 33.68 Ours 35.91 35.51 31.76 30.13 36.30 26.44 35.60 38.18 33.72 

Table 17: Model size for scenes in Synthetic NeRF dataset [26]. scene Mic Chair Ship Materials Lego Drums Ficus Hotdog mean 3DGS [15] 50 116 63 35 78 93 59 44 53 Scaffold-GS [23] 12 13 16 18 13 35 11 8 23 Ours 11.2 10.9 12.2 13.6 12.1 13.2 14.7 12.4 13 

Table 18: Per-scene metrics on Mill19 [44] dataset. Scene Rubble Building Sci-art Residence PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Size ↓ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Size ↓ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Size ↓ PSNR ↑ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ Size ↓

3DGS [15] 24.21 0.695 0.357 1566 20.6 0.677 0.340 1424 21.84 0.801 0.279 596 20.97 0.726 0.295 1273 Scaffold-GS [23] 22.69 0.662 0.342 521 19.97 0.655 0.3367 599 18.9 0.763 0.286 303 19.6 0.695 0.303 567 Ours 25.3 0.709 0.331 183 21.75 0.710 0.305 194 26.07 0.830 0.247 123 23.28 0.751 0.295 162 

24